# Mureithi_RPI_Conservation_Governance

This repository contains R scripts and data used in the analysis of vegetation productivity patterns across different governance types in Kenya's rangelands, addressing the research question: **"What insights can patterns of relative vegetation productivity as quantified by the RPI over space and time provide regarding the relative effectiveness of various governance strategies for rangeland management employed across different tenure and protection regimes?"** This project is presented by Isaac Nduta Mureithi as part of a masters dissertation in Conservation and Biodiversity at the University of Exeter, as part of the Oppenheimer Programme in African Landscape Systems (OPALS) https://opals-exeter.org/. 
The folder **data** contains study area shapefiles for Kenya's administrative boundaries, protected areas from WDPA, conservancy boundaries, and Relative Productivity Index (RPI) raster datasets. The **Kenya's Rangeland Protected Areas.Rmd** is the main R Markdown document containing the complete analysis workflow including data import, spatial processing, trend analysis using Theil-Sen slope estimation, and visualization of RPI patterns across Amboseli National Park, Tsavo East and West National Parks, AET conservancies, and surrounding buffer areas. The analysis utilises libraries including sf, terra, tidyverse, tmap, and trend for spatial data processing, statistical analysis, and mapping. The document includes custom themes for publication-quality visualizations, temporal performance metrics (MAE, R², RMSE, Rppt), and comparative analysis of vegetation productivity across different governance types.
## Data Provenance
All datasets required to run the scripts can be found in the Zenodo repository (https://zenodo.org/records/14843888), including:
1. **actual_gpp_ea_v2.tif** - Integrated annual GPP estimates for 22 hydrological years (September-August) from September 2000 to August 2023, based on the PML_V2 ET and GPP dataset.
2. **potential_gpp_ea_v2.tif** - The estimated potential GPP for each grid cell and hydrological year based on a quantile regression forest model with climatic, topographic and soil predictors (using the 90th percentile of predicted GPP as the potential).
3. **rpi_ea_v2.tif** - The relative productivity index values, defined as the ratio between actual and potential GPP in a given grid cell and hydrological year.
4. **rpi_ea_temporal_performance.tif** - A three-band raster reporting the pixel-level mean absolute error (mae), root mean squared error (rmse) and r-squared (rsq) for the quantile regression forest model. These layers can be used as quality control to identify pixels where the model is performing well or poorly at modelling inter-annual variability in GPP as a function of covariates.
